Colombia Reports Major Rise in Birth Defect Amid Zika Crisis

Colombia, which suffered a Zika epidemic that peaked in February, has reported four times as many cases of babies born with microcephaly this year as it did in 2015, providing more proof that the Zika virus causes brain damage in infants.

Because births of microcephalic infants peaked five months after the epidemic did, at about nine times the numbers of the previous July, scientists feel sure that the greatest risk is to babies whose mothers were infected during their first trimesters or early in their second.

The numbers were reported in a study released Friday by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and conducted jointly by scientists from the C.D.C. and Colombia’s national health institute.

With 105,000 suspected Zika cases, Colombia has had the second-largest Zika epidemic after Brazil. Brazil has had proportionally many more cases of microcephaly, and the reason has remained a mystery, although its population is four times larger than Colombia’s and it experienced a much longer, more intense epidemic in 2014 and 2015, especially in the northeast.

As of Thursday, Brazil had reported 2,211 cases of microcephaly in which Zika infection had been confirmed to the World Health Organization, while Colombia had reported only 60.

W.H.O. reports of confirmed cases have sometimes lagged weeks behind local reports. The study released by the C.D.C. found 476 cases of microcephaly in Colombia between January and mid-November. Of those, only 147 — about 30 percent — had laboratory evidence of Zika virus infection. But many others were not tested, and the virus is not always detectable months after it damages a fetus, so the true numbers may be higher.

About 4 percent of the fetuses tested had evidence of other infections that can cause microcephaly, such as toxoplasmosis, herpes, cytomegalovirus or syphilis. Many other fetuses were not tested or their microcephaly had no clear cause.

Of the total, 432 of the microcephaly cases were in babies born alive, and 44 were in fetuses that were stillborn, miscarried or aborted. One theory — still unproven — is that Colombia had fewer microcephaly cases than expected because many fearful women aborted their pregnancies, legally or illegally. Abortion is much more restricted in Brazil than in Colombia.

The number of confirmed cases of microcephaly is in line with predictions made by health officials after they declared an end to the Zika epidemic in Colombia in July. Early in the year, based on Brazil’s experience, Dr. Fernando Ruiz, the vice minister for public health, estimated that Colombia would have 700 cases of Zika-related microcephaly this year. In August, he changed that estimate to between 100 and 250.

Although Colombia is widely believed to have a better disease-surveillance system than Brazil, it still relies on doctors to voluntarily report birth defects. They may have been underreported in 2015, before microcephaly was in the news.


Canada Strikes a Deal to Cut Carbon Emissions by Putting a Price on Them

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau announced on Friday that Canada would introduce nationwide carbon pricing in 2018.

Mr. Trudeau worked out a deal for the plan, which aims to reduce carbon emissions by putting a price on them, after meeting with the premiers of Canada’s 10 provinces and three territories.

The leaders of two provinces, Manitoba and Saskatchewan, refused to agree to the plan, but it will be imposed on them by the federal government.

“We have a pan-Canadian price on carbon pollution because we know it is the best way to ensure better clean jobs,” Mr. Trudeau said Friday at a news conference. “This is a way for Canada to show leadership.”

Under the plan, all Canadian provinces must have an initial minimum carbon price — set by either a tax on fossil fuels or a cap-and-trade system — of 10 Canadian dollars per metric ton, or about $7.60. Over the next five years, the price would rise to 50 Canadian dollars per metric ton, or about $38. Mr. Trudeau acknowledged on Friday that the price set by the plan would not be sufficient to meet Canada’s commitments under the Paris climate accord.

As expected, the conservative government in Saskatchewan balked at signing the agreement. Brad Wall, its premier, said that while his province planned to significantly reduce emissions, a carbon price would make its farms, mines and oil industry uncompetitive. On Friday he said that was now particularly true if the incoming administration of Donald J. Trump pulled the United States out of its carbon reduction commitments.

“Let’s not be naïve,” Mr. Wall said.

Mr. Trudeau dismissed concerns about Canada being at an economic disadvantage relative to the United States.

“Canadian climate policies will be set by Canadians, not by whoever happens to be president of the United States,” he said.

Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., who was in Ottawa on Friday, tried to assuage concerns about Mr. Trump’s approach to climate issues when he addressed the leaders.

“Regardless of whether the next administration is as aggressive as we’ve been, there’s no way of turning back,” Mr. Biden said. He added that policies that reduced carbon emissions in the United States were increasingly the work of state governments or, more frequently, business decisions.

“Many of the trends that have taken hold are no longer government-dependent, they’re market-driven,” Mr. Biden said.

The other holdout province, Manitoba, was a surprise. It had previously announced plans to join Ontario and Quebec in a cap and trade system linked with California’s.

Brian Pallister, the premier of Manitoba, appeared to be withholding his approval until the federal government agreed to a new formula to calculate financial support for the provinces’ health care needs. Provincial governments operate the public health care system, but they rely on federal funds to do so. The level of those payments is a source of national discontent.

When asked why he would not sign, Mr. Pallister, a conservative like Mr. Wall, cited a long list of health care issues in his province that he said require additional federal funding from Mr. Trudeau’s Liberal government.

Mr. Trudeau said earlier that the federal government would give the provinces the money raised by any federally imposed carbon taxes.

Excluding the two holdout provinces, the agreement covers 93 percent of Canada’s population. Mr. Trudeau said that 90 percent of Canada’s energy needs would be met by “clean” sources by 2030.

While environmentalists say that Canada must still expand its commitments, they generally praised Friday’s announcement.

“Today establishes a new normal for Canada on the issue of climate change,” Catherine Abreu, the executive director of Climate Action Network, an alliance of about 100 groups, said in a statement. “For the first time, we have a framework that brings the federal government, most provincial and territorial governments, and major sectors of our economy together on a shared path.”

Some environmental groups, however, said that the agreement was undermined by Mr. Trudeau’s decision last week to approve the expansion of an pipeline linking Alberta’s oil sands to a tanker port outside of Vancouver, British Columbia.

“If it wasn’t for Trudeau’s recent pipeline approvals, this climate plan would be a historic success,” Alex Paterson, a campaigner with the Manitoba Energy Justice Coalition, said in a statement. “When you put the recent pipeline approvals beside the climate plan it is clearly about allowing oil companies to profit for as long as possible.”

Mr. Trudeau has long argued that it is possible to limit carbon emissions while also expanding Canada’s energy sector, which is a significant part of its economy.



A Dilemma for Humanity: Stark Inequality or Total War

President Obama’s policies raised taxes on the rich, but still managed to increase the slice of income going to the poorest fifth of families by just 0.6 of a percentage point, to a grand total of 4 percent. Credit Zach Gibson/The New York Times
Is there nothing to be done about galloping inequality?

Last year the typical American family experienced the fastest income gains since the government started measuring them in the 1960s. But the top 1 percent did even better, raising their share of income higher than it was when President Obama took office.

Mr. Obama has led the most progressive administration since Lyndon B. Johnson’s half a century ago, raising taxes on the rich to expand the safety net for the less fortunate. Still, by the White House’s own account, eight years of trench warfare in Washington trimmed the top 1-percenters’ share, after taxes and transfers, to only 15.4 percent, from 16.6 percent of the nation’s income. It increased the slice going to the poorest fifth of families by 0.6 percentage point, to a grand total of 4 percent.

The policies also helped push the Republican Party even further to the right, leading to the Tea Party — whose rabid opposition to government redistribution still shakes American politics. They did nothing to salve — and perhaps even added to — the stewing resentment of white working-class Americans who feel left out of the nation’s advancements, producing the electoral victory for Donald J. Trump, who has proposed a tax plan that amounts to a lavish giveaway to the rich.

The point is not that President Obama should have done better. He probably did the best he could under the circumstances. The point is that delivering deep and lasting reductions in inequality may be impossible absent catastrophic events beyond anything any of us would wish for.

History — from Ancient Rome through the Gilded Age; from the Russian Revolution to the Great Compression of incomes across the West in the middle of the 20th century — suggests that reversing the trend toward greater concentrations of income, in the United States and across the world, might be, in fact, nearly impossible.

That’s the bleak argument of Walter Scheidel, a professor of history at Stanford, whose new book, “The Great Leveler” (Princeton University Press), is due out next month. He goes so far as to state that “only all-out thermonuclear war might fundamentally reset the existing distribution of resources.” If history is anything to go by, he writes, “peaceful policy reform may well prove unequal to the growing challenges ahead.”

Professor Scheidel does not offer a grand unified theory of inequality. But scouring through the historical record, he detects a pattern: From the Stone Age to the present, ever since humankind produced a surplus to hoard, economic development has almost always led to greater inequality. There is one big thing with the power to stop this dynamic, but it’s not pretty: violence.

The big equalizing moments in history may not have always have the same cause, he writes, “but they shared one common root: massive and violent disruptions of the established order.”

The collapse of the Roman Empire in the second half of the fifth century, reinforced by a bubonic plague pandemic, brought about Western Europe’s first great leveling. Productivity collapsed and the aristocracy’s far-flung assets were expropriated, while Rome’s trade networks and fiscal structures were destroyed.

Inequality bounced back, of course. By 1300 the richest 5 percent of people had amassed nearly half the wealth in the cities of Italy’s Piedmont. But another bubonic plague known in history as the Black Death changed all that, killing a quarter of Europe’s population in the 14th century and cutting the share of wealth of Piedmont’s rich to under 35 percent.

Mr. Scheidel’s depressing view is bound to upset liberal politicians and social scientists, who quite naturally might prefer to live in a world in which events might move political and social systems to figure out a more equitable way to distribute the fruits of growth without the plague, the guillotine or state collapse.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s New Deal did provide a big income-equalizing push, but World War II was much more of a game changer because it raised demand for unskilled labor to support the war effort. Credit Getty Images
The standard understanding of inequality’s dynamics, at least until recently, was tamer. Posited in the 1950s by the Russian-born American economist Simon Kuznets, it held that disparities would grow in early stages of industrialization, as the successful few took advantage of new opportunities, but stabilize and decline as things like mass education, rising wages and social insurance naturally — and peacefully — raised incomes at the bottom.

Professor Scheidel’s analysis “omits benign forces,” said Branko Milanovic, a professor of economics at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. His book “Global Inequality” (Harvard University Press), published this year, takes a more sympathetic view of Kuznets’s analysis.

“It makes a lot of sense as far as it goes,” he said of Professor Scheidel’s thesis, “but do I believe this is the entire story about how inequality can decline? No.”

Robert J. Gordon, the economic historian at Northwestern University who recently published “The Rise and Fall of American Growth” (Princeton), also argues that Mr. Scheidel’s view is too narrow. Big shocks might be needed to shake societies and their political systems to counteract widening income disparities, he acknowledges, but violence is hardly indispensable.

President Franklin D. Roosevelt introduced the New Deal as a huge public effort to restore employment and raise incomes and spending in response to the Depression of the 1930s, not war, Professor Gordon points out.

“It takes a big shock to create the right political situation, but it is the underlying politics that change things,” he said. “The Great Depression created a political opportunity, like the assassination of President Kennedy created a big political moment for Lyndon Johnson.”

Still, violence does seem to pack more punch than other crises. The New Deal did provide a big equalizing push — increasing union membership, providing employment for the less educated and raising tax rates. But World War II was much more of a game changer. For one thing it significantly improved the earnings of those at the bottom of the social system by vastly raising demand for unskilled labor to serve the war effort.

The sense of social cohesion and sacrifice inspired by the war also underpinned an egalitarian social ethos that supported higher taxes and discouraged titanic profits and pay for chief executives. Between 1939 and 1945 the income share of the richest 10 percent dropped by more than 10 percentage points. And it did not start inching back up until the 1980s.

But whatever was holding large-scale inequality in check, it is now spent.

Many social scientists — not to say left-leaning politicians — would like to believe that there are ways to push back: higher minimum wages, perhaps a universal basic income to help curb poverty; sharply higher income tax rates for the rich along with a wealth tax; a weakening of intellectual property rules, curbs on monopolies and coordination of labor standards around the world; maybe a dollop of capital given to each citizen so all can benefit from the high returns on investment.

Dream on. As Professor Scheidel bluntly puts it: “Serious consideration of the means required to mobilize political majorities for implementing any of this advocacy is conspicuous by its absence.”

So what does this leave us with? Another world war, with or without thermonuclear weapons? Let’s hope not. State collapse looks highly unlikely outside of some bits of sub-Saharan Africa. Revolution? Little chance, given the absence of any powerful ideological challenge to capitalism.

“The world of the future is likely to be quite stable and have very high inequality,” Mr. Scheidel told me. Maybe we should just learn to stop worrying and love it.