U.S. Share Buyback Authorizations Sizzle in November

Companies haven’t been put off by the dizzying rise in U.S. stock prices since the Nov. 8 elections, with boards last month authorizing a sharp increase in share buybacks.

Stock repurchase authorizations by U.S. companies totaled $83.8 billion in value for the month, according to Birinyi Associates Inc., a 76% rise from November 2015, when they totaled $47.6 billion.

It was the most robust November for share buyback authorizations since 2005, when companies set buyback plans of $88.5 billion, according to Birinyi.

“I think companies want to get the authorizations in before the end of the year,” Chris Costelloe, an analyst at Birinyi, adding that it’s possible that the U.S. elections may have prompted company actions by removing some uncertainty from the stock markets.

“Knowing as opposed to not knowing is certainly a benefit for the market,” he said, pointing out that U.S. stocks sold off moderately in the days leading up to the elections.

A couple of exceptionally large buybacks contributed to the November spike. “There were some authorizations that were pretty big,” Mr. Costelloe said. CVS Health Corp.’s board, for example, approved a new $15 billion plan while Facebook Inc.’s directors authorized one for $6 billion of its class A common stock.

Facebook declined to comment. CVS did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Even including the robust November figures, though, authorizations for the first 11 months of 2016 trail those for the corresponding period last year by a wide margin, $628.5 billion versus $783.2 billion. The number of buyback authorizations was also lower, 902 versus 1,158.

Last year was an exceptionally robust year for buyback executions, with companies making repurchases of $696.4 billion. That was the highest number since the year before the financial crisis, 2007, when companies executed $761.8 billion in buybacks.

Year-to-date through November the financial sector notched the biggest number of buyback authorizations at 281, or 31% of the total, according to Birinyi. It also authorized the largest amount by value at $141.2 billion, or 23% of the total.