The Effects of Zika on Babies’ Brains Go Beyond Microcephaly

A new report highlights the range of damage Zika infection can cause a developing fetus.
Microcephaly, a neurological condition in which babies are born with abnormally small heads, is perhaps the most well-known disorder associated with the virus. But other abnormalities, including a collapsed skull, eye scarring, severe muscle tension, and brain calcifications, can also ensue when an expectant mother is infected. These are collectively called congenital Zika syndrome.
The report, published Thursday in the journal JAMA Pediatrics, draws on previously published studies on how Zika affects the brain. A paper published in August also examined, with arresting images, the havoc Zika wreaks on the developing human brain and body. The virus has been shown to shrink brain regions involved in movement control and vision. Some babies die before delivery or soon after birth.
The authors of the new report hope it will aid pediatricians in recognizing the syndrome to “help ensure appropriate and timely evaluation and follow-up of affected infants,” they write. They also say that the full range of Zika-related complications isn’t yet known.
The virus, which is transmitted by mosquitoes or through sex, was first detected about 70 years ago. It was linked to a surge of birth defects in Brazil in 2015, and since then, it’s spread throughout the continent and up through to the U.S.
Researchers are still trying to develop new medications and vaccines to fight the virus.


Canada’s Liberal Government, Most Provinces Endorse Climate Pact
Comes as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau approves two pipeline projects

OTTAWA—Canada’s Liberal government and the bulk of the country’s provinces reached an agreement late Friday on measures to fight climate change, even as Prime Minister Justin Trudeau tries to revive the energy sector with the recent approval of two pipeline projects.

The climate pact envisages the implementation of a federal carbon-pricing plan unveiled in October and plans to phase out coal-power electricity. This approach emerges as President-elect Donald Trump signals Washington is moving to lessen environmental regulation in a bid to drum up more investment in U.S. resource development.

“The need to act now is not simply a moral imperative but an economic necessity,” Mr. Trudeau said at a press conference, flanked by provincial and territorial leaders. “With this framework, we are telling Canadians and the world that a cleaner environment and a strong economy go hand in hand.”
Earlier Friday, U.S. Vice President Joe Biden, in Ottawa as part of a two-day visit to the Canadian capital, urged Canadian leaders to pursue carbon-reduction efforts because corporate America and the rest of the world are on that very path, despite the policies of the incoming administration.

“Whatever uncertainty exists around the near-term policy choices of the next president, I am absolutely confident the United States will continue making progress in its path to a low-carbon future,” Mr. Biden told Mr. Trudeau and provincial premiers.

Mr. Trudeau has positioned the fight against climate change as one of his government’s signature issues, with the Liberal government aiming to reduce carbon output by 30% below 2005 levels before 2030. Agreement among Ottawa and most provincial capitals fulfills a promise from Mr. Trudeau to build a national consensus on tackling climate change, and represents a pivot from the previous Conservative administration, which tended to focus on championing resource development.

Not all Canadian provinces, though, are onboard. Brad Wall, the premier of Saskatchewan, said he couldn’t endorse the pan-Canadian climate-change plan because it calls for a carbon tax when the province’s energy, mining and agriculture sectors are struggling.

Under the federal plan, Canada would start pricing carbon pollution at 10 Canadian dollars ($7.58) a metric ton in 2018, and that would rise steadily to C$50 a ton in 2022. All provinces will be required to have a carbon-pricing regime in place by 2018 that is stringent enough to meet the 2030 federal target of a 30% emissions reduction from 2005 levels, or Ottawa will impose its levy.

“Now is not the time for a tax that disproportionately impacts the industries that create jobs in our province,” said Mr. Wall, as Mr. Trudeau watched on. The unemployment rate in Saskatchewan stood at 6.8% in November, well above the 3.5% level from two years ago.

Manitoba also didn’t sign on to the accord, and its premier, Brian Pallister, said the decision was tied to Ottawa’s failure to substantially boost health-care funding.

Officials said the deal struck between Ottawa and the regions covers 93% of the country’s population.


Canada’s efforts to curb carbon emissions through a price on carbon and other regulations “will unequivocally be negative for overall economic growth, and proportionally more” in commodity-heavy regions such as Alberta and Saskatchewan, said Michael Gregory, economist at BMO Capital Markets.

The pact also envisages policies that compel retrofits on buildings to promote energy conservation; more money to encourage electric-car use; and methane reduction in the energy patch, according to a communiqué the Prime Minister’s Office released.

Mr. Trudeau’s push on climate change comes at a tenuous time for the economy, which is slowly digging itself out of an estimated C$90 billion hole, according to the Bank of Canada, triggered by the swoon in commodity prices and lost manufacturing capacity.

In that vein, Mr. Trudeau last week granted approval to two pipeline projects, among them an expansion of Kinder Morgan’s Trans Mountain pipeline. Kinder Morgan’s project would nearly triple capacity on an existing corridor, to 890,000 barrels of crude oil a day, connecting Alberta’s energy patch to tankers at a terminal in suburban Vancouver, British Columbia. Mr. Trudeau also approved Enbridge Inc.’s proposed Line 3 project, which aims to replace segments of an existing pipeline connecting Hardisty, Alberta, to Wisconsin.

Environmentalists said pipeline approval wasn’t consistent with Mr. Trudeau’s carbon-reduction target, as it would encourage further development of the oil sands. Canada’s energy sector is the country’s largest emitter of carbon, accounting for over a quarter of annual greenhouse gas output.

Mr. Trudeau, though, said Canada needed to tap new markets for its vast reserves of energy, and the transition to a low-carbon economy wouldn’t unfold overnight. Further, he said he wouldn’t have approved the Kinder Morgan project were it not for carbon-reduction measures introduced by resource-rich Alberta. The province, the nerve center of the country’s energy sector, has signed on to Canada’s carbon-pricing plan.

Environmental organizations on Friday offered initial support to Ottawa’s deal with the majority of provinces.

“This is a big deal,” said Dale Marshall, national manager for Environmental Defence. He added the agreement could put Canada “on the path to phasing out fossil fuels over time and replacing them with clean, renewable energy.”

U.S. Economy Roars Back, Grew 2.9% in Third Quarter

An acceleration in the U.S. economy in recent months should relieve fears about the economic expansion losing steam, but the third-quarter improvement does little to change the trajectory of a long but weak path for growth.

Gross domestic product, the broadest measure of U.S. output, advanced at a 2.9% inflation-adjusted annual rate in the third quarter, the Commerce Department said Friday. It was the strongest quarterly reading in two years after three straight quarters of sub-2% growth.

But underlying data showed slower gains in consumer spending, still-sluggish business investment and a housing sector subtracting from growth last quarter. The third-quarter acceleration largely reflected a buildup of business inventories and what could be a one-time jump in exports due to better soybean shipments.

“The reality is not as encouraging as the 2.9% headline,” said Morgan Stanley chief U.S. economist Ellen Zentner. In the expansion’s eighth year, “domestic factors in the economy are showing signs of slowing.”

Both presidential campaigns were quick to seize on the last comprehensive look at the economy’s health before the November election.

Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton’s campaign said the numbers show “real progress coming back from the crisis” but added “there is still more we need to do to build an economy that works for everyone.”

GOP nominee Donald Trump’s campaign called recent growth readings “dismal,” saying the economy has “failed to deliver jobs, incomes, and opportunity.” Since the recession ended in mid-2009, the economy has grown at a 2.1% annual rate, making the current expansion the weakest on records back to 1949.

While the end of the election cycle could ease some uncertainty about the path ahead, other questions are still hanging over the economy. At Proto Labs Inc., a manufacturer in Maple Plain, Minn., specializing in 3-D printing, rapid sales growth slowed over the past year, particularly for clients tied to industrial equipment and commodities, said Chief Executive Vicki Holt.
“There’s just some cautiousness that I feel in the environment,” she said. “An increased number of customers tell us the reason they haven’t bought yet is because projects have been delayed or canceled.”

A key measure of business investment rose at a historically soft 1.2% rate. Firms increased spending on building structures but reduced outlays on equipment for the fourth straight quarter.

The change in private inventories, a drag on output the five previous quarters, contributed 0.61 percentage point to the overall growth rate in the third quarter.

Exports increased at a 10% rate, the best gain in nearly three years, outweighing a smaller import increase. Separate data suggested shipments of agricultural products, especially soybeans, supported the latest gain.

“Some of that surge was due to a one-off spike in soybean exports,” said Paul Ashworth, chief U.S. economist at Capital Economics. “But it is still a welcome sign that the dollar appreciation in 2014 and 2015 is no longer weighing on exporters.”


Consumer spending advanced at a 2.1% pace in the third quarter, half the rate of the prior quarter, but still a driver of growth.

Rowpar Pharmaceuticals Inc. chief executive James Ratcliff said sales to Canada and Australia have increased recently, and he expects domestic consumers to drive sales of the Scottsdale, Ariz., firm’s Closys toothpaste and rinses, which sell at a premium to other national brands.

“We have absorbed the currency fluctuations without difficulty,” he said. “I expect U.S. consumer spending on discretionary items to continue because there is a little latitude generated by lower prices paid at the gas pump, modest wage growth and more people added to the workforce.”

The latest data suggests the economy this year isn’t likely to top 2015’s 2.6% growth rate, the best annual reading of the expansion. The economy has failed to grow at better than a 3% pace in any year since 2005, and the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office projects GDP to grow at around 2% annually through 2026

And while output advanced at a quicker rate last quarter, hiring was also stronger than in the second quarter. That could restrain improvement in worker productivity, which has fallen for three straight quarters through the middle of this year, and has been weak for much of the expansion. Productivity is a key ingredient in determining future growth in wages, prices and overall economic output.

A separate measure from the Labor Department on Friday showed compensation advanced at a steady—but not accelerating—rate, consistent with a slowly tightening labor market.

The most recent GDP gain alongside solid employment data improves the “optics” of the Federal Reserve raising its benchmark interest rate in December, said Mrs. Zentner, Morgan Stanley’s economist. She and many other economists expect the central bank to stand pat next week.

Corrections & Amplifications: 
The gross domestic product report was released on Friday. An earlier version of this article online incorrectly stated the report came out on Thursday. (10/28)

“When we look at the path after December, the data points to extreme gradualism,” she said. “Gradual could mean one hike per year.”